README.md, before:

[![Follow](https://img.shields.io/twitter/follow/immunomind.svg?style=social)](https://twitter.com/intent/follow?screen_name=immunomind)
[![CI](https://gitlab.com/immunomind/immunarch/badges/master/pipeline.svg?style=flat-square)](https://gitlab.com/immunomind/immunarch/-/jobs)
[![Issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/immunomind/immunarch?style=flat-square)](http://github.com/immunomind/immunarch/issues)
[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.3367200.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3367200)


# `immunarch` - An R Package for Painless Analysis of Large-Scale Immune Repertoire Data

## Introduction
`immunarch` is an R package designed to analyse TCR and BCR (immunoglobulin) repertoires, which constitute a large amount of data. The mission of `immunarch` is to make immune sequencing data analysis as effortless as possible---and help you focus on research instead of coding. Follow us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/immunomind) or [Telegram](https://t.me/immunomind) for news and updates.

## Features
1. Fast and easy manipulation of immune repertoire data:

    + The package automatically detects the format of your files---no more guessing what format is *that* file, just pass them to the package;
  
    + Supports all popular TCR and BCR analysis and post-analysis formats: [ImmunoSEQ](https://www.adaptivebiotech.com/products-services/immunoseq/), [IMGT](http://www.imgt.org/IMGTindex/IMGTHighV-QUEST.php), [MiTCR](https://github.com/milaboratory/mitcr/), [MiXCR](https://milaboratory.com/software/mixcr/), [MiGEC](https://milaboratory.com/software/migec/), [MigMap](https://github.com/mikessh/migmap), [VDJtools](https://milaboratory.com/software/vdjtools/), [tcR](https://github.com/imminfo/tcr), [AIRR](http://docs.airr-community.org/en/latest/), [10XGenomics](https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-vdj/datasets/), [ArcherDX](https://archerdx.com/immunoverse). More coming in the future;

    + Works on any data source you are comfortable with: R data frames, data tables from [data.table](http://r-datatable.com), databases like [MonetDB](https://github.com/MonetDB), Apache Spark data frames via [sparklyr](https://spark.rstudio.com/);
    
    + Tutorial is available [here](https://immunarch.com/articles/2_data.html).

2. Immune repertoire analysis made simple:

    + Most methods are incorporated in a couple of main functions with clear naming---no more remembering tens and tens of functions with obscure names. For details see [link](https://immunarch.com/articles/3_basic_analysis.html);

    + Repertoire overlap analysis *(common indices including overlap coefficient, Jaccard index and Morisita's overlap index)*. Tutorial is available [here](https://immunarch.com/articles/4_overlap.html);
  
    + Gene usage estimation *(correlation, Jensen-Shannon Divergence, clustering)*. Tutorial is available [here](https://immunarch.com/articles/5_gene_usage.html);

    + Diversity evaluation *(ecological diversity index, Gini index, inverse Simpson index, rarefaction analysis)*. Tutorial is available [here](https://immunarch.com/articles/6_diversity.html);

    + Tracking of clonotypes;
    
    + Coming in the next releases: CDR3 amino acid physical and chemical properties assessment, Kmer distribution measures and statistics, mutation networks.

3. Publication-ready plots with a built-in tool for visualisation manipulation: 

    + Rich visualisation procedures with [ggplot2](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/);
  
    + Built-in tool `FixVis` makes your plots publication-ready: easily change font sizes, text angles, titles, legends and many more with clear-cut GUI;
    
    + Tutorial is available [here](https://immunarch.com/articles/7_fixvis.html).

# Introduction
`immunarch` is an R package designed to analyse TCR and BCR (immunoglobulin) repertoires, which constitute a large amount of data. The mission of `immunarch` is to make immune sequencing data analysis as effortless as possible---and help you focus on research instead of coding.

## Installation
You can find the list of releases of immunarch here: https://github.com/immunomind/immunarch/releases

In order to install immunarch, you need to download it first. If you want to download the latest version, you need to download the package file, available here https://github.com/immunomind/immunarch/releases/download/latest/immunarch.tar.gz

Note that you should not un-archive it!

After downloading the file, you need to install a number of packages with R commands listed below, and run the newly installed `devtools` package to install `immunarch` locally. Upon completion the dependencies will have been already downloaded and installed.
```r
install.packages("devtools", dependencies = T)
devtools::install_local("path/to/your/folder/with/immunarch.tar.gz", dependencies=T)
```

That's it, you can start using `immunarch` now!

## Installation troubleshooting
If you can not install dependencies, please try manual installation of all dependencies by executing the following command in R console.
```r
install.packages(c("rematch", "prettyunits", "forcats", "cellranger", "progress", "zip", "backports", "ellipsis", "zeallot", "SparseM", "MatrixModels", "sp", "haven", "curl", "readxl", "openxlsx", "minqa", "nloptr", "RcppEigen", "utf8", "vctrs", "carData", "pbkrtest", "quantreg", "maptools", "rio", "lme4", "labeling", "munsell", "cli", "fansi", "pillar", "viridis", "car", "ellipse", "flashClust", "leaps", "scatterplot3d", "modeltools", "DEoptimR", "digest", "gtable", "lazyeval", "rlang", "scales", "tibble", "viridisLite", "withr", "assertthat", "glue", "magrittr", "pkgconfig", "R6", "tidyselect", "BH", "plogr", "purrr", "ggsci", "cowplot", "ggsignif", "polynom", "fastcluster", "plyr", "abind", "dendextend", "FactoMineR", "mclust", "flexmix", "prabclus", "diptest", "robustbase", "kernlab", "GlobalOptions", "shape", "colorspace", "stringi", "hms", "clipr", "crayon", "httpuv", "mime", "jsonlite", "xtable", "htmltools", "sourcetools", "later", "promises", "gridBase", "RColorBrewer", "yaml", "ggplot2", "dplyr", "dtplyr", "dbplyr", "data.table", "gridExtra", "ggpubr", "heatmap3", "ggrepel", "reshape2", "DBI", "factoextra", "fpc", "circlize", "tidyr", "Rtsne", "readr", "shiny", "shinythemes", "treemap", "igraph", "airr", "ggseqlogo", "UpSetR", "stringr", "ggalluvial", "Rcpp"))
```


If you run in any other trouble, try the following steps:

1. Check your R version. Run `version` command in the console to get your R versions. If the R version is below 3.5.0 (for example, `R version 3.1.0`), try updating your R version to the latest one.

2. Check if your packages are outdated and update them. In RStudio you can run the "Update" button on top of the package list. In R console you can run the `old.packages()` command to view a list of outdated packages.

3. If you are on Mac and have issues like old packages can't be updated, or error messages such as `ld: warning: directory not found for option` or `ld: library not found for -lgfortran`, [this link](https://thecoatlessprofessor.com/programming/rcpp-rcpparmadillo-and-os-x-mavericks--lgfortran-and--lquadmath-error/) will help you to fix the issue.

4. If you are working under Linux and have issues with igraph library or have 
Fortran errors, see [this link](https://ashokragavendran.wordpress.com/2017/10/24/error-installing-rigraph-unable-to-load-shared-object-igraph-so-libgfortran-so-4-cannot-open-shared-object-file-no-such-file-or-directory/)

5. If you encounter the following error while running the `devtools::install_local` function:

```
1: In normalizePath(path.expand(path), winslash, mustWork) :
  path[1]="path/to/your/folder/with/immunarch.tar.gz":

In file.copy(x$path, bundle, recursive = TRUE) :
  problem copying No such file or directory
```

Check your path to the downloaded package archive file. It should not be "path/to/your/folder/with/immunarch.tar.gz", but a path on your PC to the downloaded file, e.g., "C:/Users/UserName/Downloads/immunarch.tar.gz" or ""/Users/UserName/Downloads/immunarch.tar.gz"".

6. If you are working under Windows and have issues with the package installation, or if you want to change the folder for R packages, feel free to check [this forum post](https://community.rstudio.com/t/help-regarding-package-installation-renviron-rprofile-r-libs-r-libs-site-and-r-libs-user-oh-my/13888/8).

7. If troubles still persist, message us on support@immunomind.io or create an issue in https://github.com/immunomind/immunarch/issues with the code that represents the issue and the output you get in the console.

## Quick start
Importing data into R is fairly simple. The gist of the typical TCR or BCR explorational data analysis workflow can be reduced to the next few lines of code:
```r
# Load the package
library(immunarch)

# Load the data to the package
immdata = repLoad("path/to/your/folder/with/repertoires")
# If you folder contains metadata.txt file, immdata will have two elements:
# - immdata$data with a list of parsed repertoires
# - immdata$meta with the metadata file

# If you don't have your data, you can load repertoire data
# that comes with immunarch. Uncomment (i.e., remove the "#" symbol)
# in the next line to load the data
# data(immdata)

# Compute and visualise overlap statistics
ov = repOverlap(immdata$data)
vis(ov)

# Cluster samples using K-means algorithm applied to the number of overlapped clonotypes
# and visualise the results
ov.kmeans = repOverlapAnalysis(ov, .method = "mds")
vis(ov.kmeans)

# Compute and visualise gene usage with samples, grouped by their disease status
gu = geneUsage(immdata$data)
vis(gu, .by="Status", .meta=immdata$meta)

# Compute Jensen-Shannon divergence among gene distributions of samples, 
# cluster samples using the hierarchical clustering and visualise the results
gu.clust = geneUsageAnalysis(gu, .method = "js+hclust")
vis(gu.clust)

# Compare diversity of repertoires and visualise samples, grouped by two parameters
div = repDiversity(immdata$data, .method = "chao1")
vis(div, .by=c("Status", "Lane"), .meta=immdata$meta)

# Manipulate the visualisation of diversity estimates to make the plot publication-ready
div.plot = vis(div, .by=c("Status", "Lane"), .meta=immdata$meta)
fixVis(div.plot)
```

If you want to test the package without parsing any data, you can load a small test dataset provided along with the package. Load the data with the following command:

```r
data(immdata)
```

# Citation

ImmunoMind Team. (2019). immunarch: An R Package for Painless Analysis of Large-Scale Immune Repertoire Data. Zenodo. http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3367200

BibTex:
```
@misc{immunomind_team_2019_3367200,
  author       = {{ImmunoMind Team}},
  title        = {{immunarch: An R Package for Painless Analysis of 
                   Large-Scale Immune Repertoire Data}},
  month        = aug,
  year         = 2019,
  doi          = {10.5281/zenodo.3367200},
  url          = {https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3367200}
}
```

For EndNote citation import the [`immunarch-citation.xml`](https://github.com/immunomind/immunarch/releases/download/latest/immunarch-citation.xml) file.

# License

The package is freely distributed under the Apache v2 license. You can read more about it [here](https://tldrlegal.com/license/apache-license-2.0-(apache-2.0)).

Additionally, we provide an annual subscription that includes next services:

- 100 hours of consultations on the TCR & BCR repertoire analysis (contact us to purchase more);
- Priority email and call support;
- Package modifications and feature implementations are issued promptly; 
- Setup a cloud or cluster installation of *immunarch*, including the development of cloud *immunarch*-based software;
- Use *immunarch* team expertise in your projects;
- If you need license other than the current, contact us.

Contact us at support@immunomind.io for more information.

Commit message:

add a fix for MacOS Mojave isue

README.md, after:

[![Follow](https://img.shields.io/twitter/follow/immunomind.svg?style=social)](https://twitter.com/intent/follow?screen_name=immunomind)
[![CI](https://gitlab.com/immunomind/immunarch/badges/master/pipeline.svg?style=flat-square)](https://gitlab.com/immunomind/immunarch/-/jobs)
[![Issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/immunomind/immunarch?style=flat-square)](http://github.com/immunomind/immunarch/issues)
[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.3367200.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3367200)


# `immunarch` - An R Package for Painless Analysis of Large-Scale Immune Repertoire Data

## Introduction
`immunarch` is an R package designed to analyse TCR and BCR (immunoglobulin) repertoires, which constitute a large amount of data. The mission of `immunarch` is to make immune sequencing data analysis as effortless as possible---and help you focus on research instead of coding. Follow us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/immunomind) or [Telegram](https://t.me/immunomind) for news and updates.

## Features
1. Fast and easy manipulation of immune repertoire data:

    + The package automatically detects the format of your files---no more guessing what format is *that* file, just pass them to the package;
  
    + Supports all popular TCR and BCR analysis and post-analysis formats: [ImmunoSEQ](https://www.adaptivebiotech.com/products-services/immunoseq/), [IMGT](http://www.imgt.org/IMGTindex/IMGTHighV-QUEST.php), [MiTCR](https://github.com/milaboratory/mitcr/), [MiXCR](https://milaboratory.com/software/mixcr/), [MiGEC](https://milaboratory.com/software/migec/), [MigMap](https://github.com/mikessh/migmap), [VDJtools](https://milaboratory.com/software/vdjtools/), [tcR](https://github.com/imminfo/tcr), [AIRR](http://docs.airr-community.org/en/latest/), [10XGenomics](https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-vdj/datasets/), [ArcherDX](https://archerdx.com/immunoverse). More coming in the future;

    + Works on any data source you are comfortable with: R data frames, data tables from [data.table](http://r-datatable.com), databases like [MonetDB](https://github.com/MonetDB), Apache Spark data frames via [sparklyr](https://spark.rstudio.com/);
    
    + Tutorial is available [here](https://immunarch.com/articles/2_data.html).

2. Immune repertoire analysis made simple:

    + Most methods are incorporated in a couple of main functions with clear naming---no more remembering tens and tens of functions with obscure names. For details see [link](https://immunarch.com/articles/3_basic_analysis.html);

    + Repertoire overlap analysis *(common indices including overlap coefficient, Jaccard index and Morisita's overlap index)*. Tutorial is available [here](https://immunarch.com/articles/4_overlap.html);
  
    + Gene usage estimation *(correlation, Jensen-Shannon Divergence, clustering)*. Tutorial is available [here](https://immunarch.com/articles/5_gene_usage.html);

    + Diversity evaluation *(ecological diversity index, Gini index, inverse Simpson index, rarefaction analysis)*. Tutorial is available [here](https://immunarch.com/articles/6_diversity.html);

    + Tracking of clonotypes;
    
    + Coming in the next releases: CDR3 amino acid physical and chemical properties assessment, Kmer distribution measures and statistics, mutation networks.

3. Publication-ready plots with a built-in tool for visualisation manipulation: 

    + Rich visualisation procedures with [ggplot2](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/);
  
    + Built-in tool `FixVis` makes your plots publication-ready: easily change font sizes, text angles, titles, legends and many more with clear-cut GUI;
    
    + Tutorial is available [here](https://immunarch.com/articles/7_fixvis.html).

# Introduction
`immunarch` is an R package designed to analyse TCR and BCR (immunoglobulin) repertoires, which constitute a large amount of data. The mission of `immunarch` is to make immune sequencing data analysis as effortless as possible---and help you focus on research instead of coding.

## Installation
You can find the list of releases of immunarch here: https://github.com/immunomind/immunarch/releases

In order to install immunarch, you need to download it first. If you want to download the latest version, you need to download the package file, available here https://github.com/immunomind/immunarch/releases/download/latest/immunarch.tar.gz

Note that you should not un-archive it!

After downloading the file, you need to install a number of packages with R commands listed below, and run the newly installed `devtools` package to install `immunarch` locally. Upon completion the dependencies will have been already downloaded and installed.
```r
install.packages("devtools", dependencies = T)
devtools::install_local("path/to/your/folder/with/immunarch.tar.gz", dependencies=T)
```

That's it, you can start using `immunarch` now!

## Installation troubleshooting
If you can not install dependencies, please try manual installation of all dependencies by executing the following command in R console.
```r
install.packages(c("rematch", "prettyunits", "forcats", "cellranger", "progress", "zip", "backports", "ellipsis", "zeallot", "SparseM", "MatrixModels", "sp", "haven", "curl", "readxl", "openxlsx", "minqa", "nloptr", "RcppEigen", "utf8", "vctrs", "carData", "pbkrtest", "quantreg", "maptools", "rio", "lme4", "labeling", "munsell", "cli", "fansi", "pillar", "viridis", "car", "ellipse", "flashClust", "leaps", "scatterplot3d", "modeltools", "DEoptimR", "digest", "gtable", "lazyeval", "rlang", "scales", "tibble", "viridisLite", "withr", "assertthat", "glue", "magrittr", "pkgconfig", "R6", "tidyselect", "BH", "plogr", "purrr", "ggsci", "cowplot", "ggsignif", "polynom", "fastcluster", "plyr", "abind", "dendextend", "FactoMineR", "mclust", "flexmix", "prabclus", "diptest", "robustbase", "kernlab", "GlobalOptions", "shape", "colorspace", "stringi", "hms", "clipr", "crayon", "httpuv", "mime", "jsonlite", "xtable", "htmltools", "sourcetools", "later", "promises", "gridBase", "RColorBrewer", "yaml", "ggplot2", "dplyr", "dtplyr", "dbplyr", "data.table", "gridExtra", "ggpubr", "heatmap3", "ggrepel", "reshape2", "DBI", "factoextra", "fpc", "circlize", "tidyr", "Rtsne", "readr", "shiny", "shinythemes", "treemap", "igraph", "airr", "ggseqlogo", "UpSetR", "stringr", "ggalluvial", "Rcpp"))
```


If you run in any other trouble, try the following steps:

1. Check your R version. Run `version` command in the console to get your R versions. If the R version is below 3.5.0 (for example, `R version 3.1.0`), try updating your R version to the latest one.

2. Check if your packages are outdated and update them. In RStudio you can run the "Update" button on top of the package list. In R console you can run the `old.packages()` command to view a list of outdated packages.

3. If you are on Mac and have issues like old packages can't be updated, or error messages such as `ld: warning: directory not found for option` or `ld: library not found for -lgfortran`, [this link](https://thecoatlessprofessor.com/programming/rcpp-rcpparmadillo-and-os-x-mavericks--lgfortran-and--lquadmath-error/) will help you to fix the issue.

4. If you are on Mac Mojave (1.14) and run into the following error:
```
/Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer/Toolchains/XcodeDefault.xctoolchain/usr/include/c++/v1/math.h:301:15: fatal error: 'math.h' file not found
#include_next <math.h>
              ^~~~~~~~
```

Open Terminal, execute the following command and try again to install `immunarch`:
```
sudo installer -pkg /Library/Developer/CommandLineTools/Packages/macOS_SDK_headers_for_macOS_10.14.pkg -target /
```

5. If you are working under Linux and have issues with igraph library or have 
Fortran errors, see [this link](https://ashokragavendran.wordpress.com/2017/10/24/error-installing-rigraph-unable-to-load-shared-object-igraph-so-libgfortran-so-4-cannot-open-shared-object-file-no-such-file-or-directory/)

6. If you encounter the following error while running the `devtools::install_local` function:

```
1: In normalizePath(path.expand(path), winslash, mustWork) :
  path[1]="path/to/your/folder/with/immunarch.tar.gz":

In file.copy(x$path, bundle, recursive = TRUE) :
  problem copying No such file or directory
```

Check your path to the downloaded package archive file. It should not be "path/to/your/folder/with/immunarch.tar.gz", but a path on your PC to the downloaded file, e.g., "C:/Users/UserName/Downloads/immunarch.tar.gz" or ""/Users/UserName/Downloads/immunarch.tar.gz"".

7. If you are working under Windows and have issues with the package installation, or if you want to change the folder for R packages, feel free to check [this forum post](https://community.rstudio.com/t/help-regarding-package-installation-renviron-rprofile-r-libs-r-libs-site-and-r-libs-user-oh-my/13888/8).

8. If troubles still persist, message us on support@immunomind.io or create an issue in https://github.com/immunomind/immunarch/issues with the code that represents the issue and the output you get in the console.

## Quick start
Importing data into R is fairly simple. The gist of the typical TCR or BCR explorational data analysis workflow can be reduced to the next few lines of code:
```r
# Load the package
library(immunarch)

# Load the data to the package
immdata = repLoad("path/to/your/folder/with/repertoires")
# If you folder contains metadata.txt file, immdata will have two elements:
# - immdata$data with a list of parsed repertoires
# - immdata$meta with the metadata file

# If you don't have your data, you can load repertoire data
# that comes with immunarch. Uncomment (i.e., remove the "#" symbol)
# in the next line to load the data
# data(immdata)

# Compute and visualise overlap statistics
ov = repOverlap(immdata$data)
vis(ov)

# Cluster samples using K-means algorithm applied to the number of overlapped clonotypes
# and visualise the results
ov.kmeans = repOverlapAnalysis(ov, .method = "mds")
vis(ov.kmeans)

# Compute and visualise gene usage with samples, grouped by their disease status
gu = geneUsage(immdata$data)
vis(gu, .by="Status", .meta=immdata$meta)

# Compute Jensen-Shannon divergence among gene distributions of samples, 
# cluster samples using the hierarchical clustering and visualise the results
gu.clust = geneUsageAnalysis(gu, .method = "js+hclust")
vis(gu.clust)

# Compare diversity of repertoires and visualise samples, grouped by two parameters
div = repDiversity(immdata$data, .method = "chao1")
vis(div, .by=c("Status", "Lane"), .meta=immdata$meta)

# Manipulate the visualisation of diversity estimates to make the plot publication-ready
div.plot = vis(div, .by=c("Status", "Lane"), .meta=immdata$meta)
fixVis(div.plot)
```

If you want to test the package without parsing any data, you can load a small test dataset provided along with the package. Load the data with the following command:

```r
data(immdata)
```

# Citation

ImmunoMind Team. (2019). immunarch: An R Package for Painless Analysis of Large-Scale Immune Repertoire Data. Zenodo. http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3367200

BibTex:
```
@misc{immunomind_team_2019_3367200,
  author       = {{ImmunoMind Team}},
  title        = {{immunarch: An R Package for Painless Analysis of 
                   Large-Scale Immune Repertoire Data}},
  month        = aug,
  year         = 2019,
  doi          = {10.5281/zenodo.3367200},
  url          = {https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3367200}
}
```

For EndNote citation import the [`immunarch-citation.xml`](https://github.com/immunomind/immunarch/releases/download/latest/immunarch-citation.xml) file.

# License

The package is freely distributed under the Apache v2 license. You can read more about it [here](https://tldrlegal.com/license/apache-license-2.0-(apache-2.0)).

Additionally, we provide an annual subscription that includes next services:

- 100 hours of consultations on the TCR & BCR repertoire analysis (contact us to purchase more);
- Priority email and call support;
- Package modifications and feature implementations are issued promptly; 
- Setup a cloud or cluster installation of *immunarch*, including the development of cloud *immunarch*-based software;
- Use *immunarch* team expertise in your projects;
- If you need license other than the current, contact us.

Contact us at support@immunomind.io for more information.
